Document dynamic cardinality enforcement (KEP 2305) (#41998)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/reference/instrumentation/dynamic-cardinality-enforcement.md

---
title: Dynamic Cardinality Enforcement
content_type: reference
weight: 50
description: >-
  Dynamically configuring an allowlist of label values for a metric at runtime.
---

<!-- overview -->

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.29" state="beta" >}}

Metrics can have unbounded dimensions, leading to several issues. The SIG
Instrumentation guidelines recommend understanding the comprehensive values for
a label at the instrumentation time, which is a challenge due to lack of means
of validating adherence apart from manually reviewing PRs, which can be
error-prone and overlooked in some cases. Even if strict adherence is achieved,
old issues of metric cardinality will still persist.

Therefore, a different solution is proposed: to dynamically configure an
allowlist of label values for a metric family during the boot sequence of a
Kubernetes component. A new flag will is added to aid in ingesting the
allowlist. The design is based on the assumption that metrics are unique and can
be identified by their metric descriptor.

<!-- body -->

> The API server,  supports a `allow-metric-labels` flag describing the the set of
> metric label-values that should be enabled while others will be ignored owing to
> their unbounded cardinality. This can also be defined in a manifest using the
> `allow-metric-labels-manifest` flag.
> 
> The `allow-metric-labels` flag accepts metric-label-values inputs representing
> the label values for a particular metric family that should not be dropped. For
> example, `metric1,label2='v1,v2,v3' metric2,label1='v1,v2,v3'` will accept `v1`,
> `v2`, and `v3` values for labels `label1` and `label2` for `metric2` and
> `metric1` metric families respectively. This can also be done within a manifest
> supplied under `allow-metric-labels-manifest` to make things a bit more
> convenient, and is specified as follows.

Reviewer: This is hard to document well. Kubernetes already has a term “manifest” so I recommend explicitly
explaining how these are different.
(Ideally: revisit the KEP and change the names of the command line argument before beta, so that
we don't need to teach the difference).

I think this suggested text paraphrases what you've written @rexagod, but I'm not sure. It matches the mental model I built after reading the PR.

```suggestion
You can configure your Kubernetes cluster with an allow list of values for metric labels.
You can specify this allow list either through command line configuration or indirectly
using a local configuration file
(termed a _manifest_, although the format is not the same as a Kubernetes object
{{< glossary_tooltip text="manifest" term_id="manifest" >}}).

To directly specify allowed values, use the `--allow-metric-labels` command line argument 
to the a component. For Kubernetes {{< skew currentVersion >}}, only the kube-apiserver
supports this command line argument.

Here's an example of using `--allow-metric-labels`:  
`kube-apiserver --allow-metric-labels example_1_total,label1=v1,v2,v3 example_gauge2,label3=v1,v2 ...`.  
If you configure this, the API server will accept only a `v1`, `v2`, and `v3` value of the `label1` for any
`example_count1` metric. Similarly, for the `example_gauge2` metric, the `label3` label can only have
the value `v1` or `v2`.

If you want to use a configuration file, you specify the path to that configuration file
 using the `--allow-metric-labels-manifest` command line argument to a component.
Here's an example of the contents of that configuration file:
```

Author: Hello, Tim. Perhaps some clarification on how I chose this flag name may help here.

Per [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manifest_file#:~:text=In%20computing%2C%20a%20manifest%20file,constituent%20files%20of%20the%20program.), a manifest is "a file containing metadata for a group of accompanying files that are part of a set or coherent unit. For example, the files of a computer program may have a manifest describing the name, version number, license and the constituent files of the program."

An [**image manifest**](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/manifest/) is a file that would contain metadata specific to the image, to put it briefly. Similarly, a (Kubernetes) **object manifest** is a file containing Kubernetes schema representation for an object.

By that same train of thought, an `allow-metric-labels-manifest` contains data meta to, and necessary for API servers to determine the metric-labels allow-list from the appropriate **allow-list manifest**, which I've also made clear in the recent patch update.

```yaml
allow-list:
- "metric1,label2": "v1,v2,v3"
- "metric2,label1": "v1,v2,v3"
```

Additionally, the `cardinality_enforcement_unexpected_categorizations_total`
meta-metric records the count of unexpected categorizations during cardinality

> enforcement, i.e., whenever a label value is encountered that is not allowed

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
enforcement; that is: whenever a label value is encountered that is not allowed
```
